---
layout: post
title: GSoC Week 10
tags: [gsoc, python, programming, maths]
comments: true
image:
 feature: gsoc.png
---

I spent a good amount of time this week trying to make the series function more
intelligent about which `ring` it operates on. The earlier strategy of using the
`EX` ring proved to be slow in many cases. I had discussions with [Kalevi
Suominen](https://github.com/jksuom), who is a developer at SymPy and we figured
out the following strategy:

* The user inputs a Basic `expr`. We use `sring` over QQ to get the starting ring.

* We call individual functions by recursing on `expr`. If `expr` has a constant
term we create a new ring with additional generators required by the ring (e.g
sin and cos in case of `rs_sin` and expand `expr` over that.)

* This means that each `ring_series` function now can add generators to the ring
it gets so that it can expand the expression.

This results in considerable speed-up as we do operations on the simplest
possible ring as opposed to using `EX` which is the most complex (and hence
slowest) ring. Because of this, the time taken by the `series_fast` function in
[faster_series](https://github.com/shivamvats/sympy/tree/ring_series_fast) is
marginally more than direct function calls. The function doesn't yet have code
for handling arbitrary expressions, which will add some overhead of its own.

Most of the extra time is taken by `sring`. The overhead is constant, however (for
a given expression). So for `series_fast(sin(a**2 + a*b), a, 10)` the extra
routines take about 50% of the total time (the function is 2-4 x slower). For
`series_fast(sin(a**2 + a*b), a, 100)`, they take 2% of the total time and the
function is almost as fast as on `QQ`

There is, of course scope for speedup in `sring` (as mentioned in its file).
Another option is to minimise the number of calls to `sring`, if possible to
just one (in the `series_fast` function).

In my last post I talked about the new `solveset` module that
[Harsh](https://github.com/hargup) and [Amit](https://github.com/aktech) are
working on. I am working with them and I sent a
[patch](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/9762) to add a `domain` argument to
the `solveset` function. It is pretty cool stuff in that solution is always
guaranteed to be complete.

### Next Week

I haven't been yet been able to start porting the code to Symengine as the
`Polynomial` wrappers are not yet ready. Hopefully, they should be done by the next
week. Till, then I will focus on improving `series_fast` and any interesting
issues that come my way.

* Write a fully functional `series_fast`. Profile it properly and optimise it.

* Polynomial wrappers.

* Document the functions and algorithms used in `ring_series.py`

Cheers!!
