---
layout: post
title: GSoC Week 4
---

Though I had resolved to update my blog posts by Friday every week, this one is
quite late. This is mostly because this week was one of the most confusing yet,
in terms of figuring out how to get things done within the existing code
structure of Sympy. And that process is still on.

### So Far

[PR 9495](https://github.com/sympy/sympy/pull/9495) is under review. It took
some time to decide how the precision/order of Puiseux series needs to be
handled;

We had an interesting discussion on reverting a series
[here](https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/sympy/k3mOpzdZX20).  Fredrik
Johansson suggested a fast algorithm of his for it. I also got to know a
very ingenuous way to expand trigonometric functions. For example, for
exponential:

```
def exp_series(A, n):
        B = [exp(A[0])]
        for k in range(1, n):
            B.append(sum(j*A[j]*B[k-j]/k for j in range(1,min(len(A),k+1))))
        return B
```

Possibly the most confusing part of the project is to get `ring_series` working
over an `Expression` domain, i.e, the coefficients can be any SymPy symbolic
expression. Multivariate series need to have multiple gens, implying that in a
multivariate series, the coefficients can be symbolic functions of `PolyElement`
objects. However, `PolyElement` class is of type `CantSympify`, which means I
can't use it in SymPy functions. I had quite a few discussions with my mentors
over it and I know now what the issues are. I need to solve them next week.

### Next Week

* Finalise how to handle symbolic coefficients and finish it

* Read Fredrik's paper and try to implement it.

Cheers!
